India is an ancient country. As per many Indian scholars, Indian culture is the oldest in the world.
Indians pondered over all aspects of life and being expert in writing, they composed literature on poetry,
philosophy, art, science and other topics. As per foreign scholars too, Indian culture is older than china,
Egypt, Mesopotamia etc. Despite having such great scholars in greatly civilized ancient country, India
does not have a written chronology of history, this looks surprising.
Some foreign historians have gone to the extent and said that Indian historian lacked historical sense.
Reaching to conclusion that there was no historical creation in ancient Indian time, would be wrong.
Actually, there were no such important historical development in that period that could be recorded.
Actually this can be considered as truth that Indians were neutral to history and politics and they used
to study these subjects under other social disciplines only. As per Dr. R.C. Majumdar, “One of the
greatest defects of Indian culture is the aversion of Indians to write history. They applied themselves
to all conceivable branches of literature and excelled in many of them, but never seriously took to
writing history.” Alberuni says, Hindus don’t pay much attention to the historical order of things.
As regards knowing Indian resources, sources to history prior to 6th century BC are limited, but post
that period we have enough sources. Researches till now have dug out suffi cient ancient Indian history
resources. Even then, it is not possible to have chronological description of ancient Indian history,
as other nations. Main reason being absence of great historians like Herodotus of Greece (father of
history), Livy of Rome or Alberuni of Turkey.
Reasons of Neutralism of Indians towards History—Lack of chronological order in Indian history
can’t be justifi ed to see it as lack of historical sense. There can be many reasons for such ignorance to
historical chronology as mentioned below

(1) Historical Writers were Brahmans—Composer of entire Indian literature were Brahmans, who Notes
had little interest in politics. Their interest was more in poetry, arts, philosophy and science. This
section of society was majorly involved in spiritual meditation and establishment of moral values.
They had little interest in physical life. Instead of describing activities of kings and emperors, they
mentioned different disciplines required for guidance of the society of their ages. This is why, their
attention could not go to chronological listing of events.
 (2) Historians gave importance to concepts rather than events—Study of ancient material tells us that
scholars that time were inclined towards propounding different concepts. They paid less attention to
the events happening in the society. They were of the view that forces behind such events need to be
analyzed. Events are not important. Hence, due to negligence of events, chronology got neglected.
 (3) Huge point of view of Scholars—Accepting that ancient Indians were totally ignorant about history
is not true, as we have huge material available in form of ancient literature. Actually, ancient Indians
had huge perspective about history and they considered it as part of knowledge. They saw history
as part of religion, morality, politics, economics and literature. Hence, they never felt the need to
write chronological history.
 (4) Negligence towards writing History—Even then, we can’t deny that they were ignorant towards writing
history. Though no other species of the world did such history writing, the way it is done in modern
times, still the tendency of accepting history as a separate branch is more among foreigners than Indians.
1.1.1 Search of Ancient Indian History
This is known to all that history is totally dependent on resources for study. This is the reason that foreign
and Indian historians have tried to unite broken chain of ancient Indian history with great effort and
dedication. Work of fi nding Indian history resources was started by British Scholars. They interpreted
it as per their interest. It resulted in many misconceptions about Indian history. Later on, when Indian
historians took job in their hands, then many of those were clarifi ed and Indian history its deserved place.
Discovery of ancient Indian history started in the second half of 18th century. Maxmuller translated
Vedas in English, which established superiority of Indian civilization over entire western world. After
this English scholars translated Bhagwadgeeta, Hitopdesh and Shakuntala etc in English. In 18th century,
‘Asiatic society of Bengal’ started research in Asia. With this Indian historians too got inspired to know
about Indian history. In 1862, department of law was established in Indian Archaeology. Lord Curzon
showed interest and discovery and protection of old monuments got encouragement. This work is
continuing with foreign and Indian scholars. In 1922 under John Marshall leadership, Harappa culture
was discovered. This work is progressing. Different excavation work at various sites in India is helping
to piece together scattered culture.
Thus, there is no big issue in knowing ancient Indian historical knowledge. Only problem is the
chronology. In fact, there is no dearth of its resources of study. These sources as a result of regular
researches are being more capable of interpreting history.

. Archaeological Sources.
 2. Literary Sources.
 3. Accounts of Foreign Travellers
I. Archaeological Sources
In ancient Indian history, archaeological material has helped a lot. In fact, it has helped in writing
scientifi c historical writing. Archaeology itself has become independent discipline. Where historical
material is silent or unclear, there is comes in as handy. In ambiguous situations, archaeological material
only helps and fi lls up blank areas of history. Had archaeological materials did not help; we would not
have been able to know about prehistoric Indian period. Archaeological materials can be divided in four
parts in context of Indian history—
 1. Excavation material 2. Epigraphs or Inscriptions 3. Monuments 4. Coins
(1) Excavation Material—Different sites have been excavated in India and remains and wreckages of
towns, buildings, temples and various forts have been found. These provide ample information about
ancient Indian history. Many blurred pages of our history have become clear, dates have been defi ned
and many scattered pieces of information can be joined together. In Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa
excavation, we have found remains of town, buildings, human body, animal skeletons, images of deities,
utensils, tools, roads and bathing pools etc. These throw light on civilization of 5000 years ago. With the
excavation of Takshshila, ambiguity on chronology of Kushan Vansh has been sorted. Many Buddha
idols have found from Sanchi (near Bhopal), which are evidence to the rise and fall of Jain and Buddha
faith. Similarly, remains found in Sarnath give ample information on Bauddha religion. 